Rust and RISC-V (#6)
cecton/blog: content/posts/rust-and-riscv.md

---
title: "Rust and RISC-V"
date: 2020-12-15T06:21:00+02:00
---
**Target audience:** experienced developers with little knowledge in embedded
development and electronic. Check
["Rust, Arduino and Embedded Development as a Beginner: Part 1"]({{< ref "rust-and-arduino-part1" >}})
for a more beginner friendly article.

Introduction
------------

After my experience with the AVR microchip family (the same you use on Arduino
boards) I decided to try out Rust on a RISC-V based board. I don't work in
embedded development but most of the professional projects I saw were using

> either AVR either ARM-based architecture. As I understand the reason for that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
either AVR or ARM-based architectures. As I understand the reason for that
```

is because they are kinda industry standards and you can find PCB assemblers

> who provides AVR and ARM chips more easily. RISC-V on the other hand is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
who provide AVR and ARM chips more easily. RISC-V on the other hand is
```

relatively new (2010 according to

> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RISC-V)) but is entirely open source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RISC-V)) and is entirely open source.
```

> which doesn't require fees to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike other instruction sets, RISC-V has no license fees attached to it.
```

I had the chance to test two different
chip producers for RISC-V: [SiFive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SiFive)

> (which actually outsource the actual manufacturing) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(which outsource the actual manufacturing) and
```

[GigaDevice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GigaDevice). SiFive is what you will
see on the most common development boards like the HiFive boards. In this
article I'm using the
[RED-V Thing Plus](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15799) from SparkFun which
has the same MCU than the
[HiFive 1 Rev B](https://www.sifive.com/boards/hifive1-rev-b). One of the main

> advantage of the RED-V is again the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
advantage of the RED-V is the
```

> [Qwiic connector](https://www.sparkfun.com/qwiic) that I use in the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Qwiic connector](https://www.sparkfun.com/qwiic) that I used in the previous
```

article ["Rust, Arduino and Embedded Development as a Beginner: Part 1"]({{< ref "rust-and-arduino-part1" >}}).
This allows us to connect the exact same screen
([Zio Qwiic OLED Display (1.5inch, 128x128)](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15890))

> to the board and get started very qwiickly. It is worth mentioning that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the board and get started very qwiickly. It is worth mentioning that while
```
😂

> advantage of the Qwiic connector is how easily and safely you can connect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Qwiic connector makes it easy and safe to connect
```

> components together but not the transfer speed of the data: connection through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
components together, it is not fast: connection through
```

serial is faster. In this tutorial, we are going to push this I2C to its
limits thanks to the very powerful FE310 microchip.

### My own hardware choice

 *  [SparkFun RED-V Thing Plus](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15799)
 *  [Zio Qwiic OLED Display (1.5inch, 128x128)](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15890)
 *  [Qwiic Cable - 50mm](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/14426)

**Note:** We don't need a USB to TTL serial cable this time.

First step: making sure everything works
----------------------------------------

> I assume that the screen is working because I already made it working in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I assume that the screen is working because I already made it work in the
```

> previous tutorial with the AVR. All we need to do now is making sure that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
previous tutorial with the AVR. All we need to do now is make sure that the
```

> board itself is working by making a led blink. In this tutorial I'm not going

Reviewer: Making a led blink is the hello world of embedded dev ;-)

Author: :100:

        115_200.bps(),
        clocks,
    );

    // get all 3 led pins in a tuple (each pin is it's own type here)
    let rgb_pins = pins!(pins, (spi0_sck));
    let mut blue = rgb_pins.into_inverted_output();

    // get the local interrupts struct
    let clint = dr.core_peripherals.clint;

    let mut led_status = true;

    // get the sleep struct
    let mut sleep = Sleep::new(clint.mtimecmp, clocks);

    sprintln!("Starting blink loop");

    loop {
        match led_status {
            true => blue.set_high().unwrap(),
            false => blue.set_low().unwrap(),
        }

        led_status = !led_status;

        sprintln!("Status: {}", led_status);

        sleep.delay_ms(200_u32);
    }
}
```

If the check is working you can now use one of those methods to upload the new
firmware:

1.  Using J-Link GDB Server

    You will need to run multiple terminal for this because the GDB server
    needs to keep running in the background. In one terminal you need to run:

    ```text
    sudo JLinkGDBServer -device FE310 -if JTAG -speed 4000 -port 3333 -nogui
    ```

    (You might not need `sudo` if you have set up user permissions to the
    device).

>     The program should keeps waiting if it detected the device properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The program should keep waiting if it detected the device properly.
```

    Then you can run in another terminal:

    ```text
    cargo run --example leds_blink
    ```

    The two programs will interact and load the new firmware. You should see
    the led blinking.

2.  By copying the hex file.

>     You first need to build the program:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    First, you need to build the program:
```

    ```text
    cargo build --example leds_blink
    ```

>     When you connect the device in USB you should see a new disk, mount it.

Reviewer: Maybe put a reference to the paragraph higher up where you explain how you do this. (push the button etc.)

Author: hmm? You don't press any button or anything here. The method 2 is totally unrelated to the method 1. You connect the thing in USB and the disk appear, it is as easy as that. Maybe I should make it clearer? I'm not sure what confused you

    Now you can generate the hex file from the binary using this command:

    ```text
    objcopy -S -j .text -j .rodata -O ihex \
        ./target/riscv32imac-unknown-none-elf/debug/examples/leds_blink \
        /media/your_device/leds_blink.hex
    ```

>     Unmount. It should reboot automatically on the new firmware and you should

Reviewer: Maybe make these steps an itemized list, so it's clear that you have to take these steps in the right order?

    see the led blinking.

You can also observe the logs through a serial USB. Check `/dev/ttyACM0`.
Example using [serial-monitor](https://crates.io/crates/serial-monitor):

```text
serial-monitor -p /dev/ttyACM0 -b 115200
```

Make an animation on the screen
-------------------------------

If you followed the previous tutorial
["Rust, Arduino and Embedded Development as a Beginner: Part 1"]({{< ref "rust-and-arduino-part1" >}})
this should be quite straightforward.

You will need the animation frame we have generated in
["Rust, Arduino and Embedded Development as a Beginner: Part 3"]({{< ref "rust-and-arduino-part3" >}}).
Copy the RAW files to the `src/` directory.

> Make sure yo use nightly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the example, we are using nightly features, so make sure you tell rustup to use it:
```

Author: yo

const FRAME_10: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-10.raw");
const FRAME_11: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-11.raw");
const FRAME_12: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-12.raw");
const FRAME_13: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-13.raw");
const FRAME_14: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-14.raw");
const FRAME_15: &[u8] = include_bytes!("F501-15.raw");

#[entry]
fn main() -> ! {
    let dr = DeviceResources::take().unwrap();
    let p = dr.peripherals;
    let pins = dr.pins;

    // Configure clocks
    // NOTE: this screen https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15890 goes up to 320MHz
    // NOTE: watch out because it gets really warm!
    let clocks = hifive1::clock::configure(p.PRCI, p.AONCLK, 100.mhz().into());

    // Configure UART for stdout
    hifive1::stdout::configure(
        p.UART0,
        pin!(pins, uart0_tx),
        pin!(pins, uart0_rx),
        115_200.bps(),
        clocks,
    );

    // Configure I2C
    let sda = pin!(pins, i2c0_sda).into_iof0();
    let scl = pin!(pins, i2c0_scl).into_iof0();
    let mut i2c = I2c::new(p.I2C0, sda, scl, Speed::Fast, clocks);

    // Get blue led
    let sck = pin!(pins, spi0_sck);
    let mut blue = sck.into_inverted_output();

>     let address = 0b0111100; // replace this by the address of your device

Reviewer: How do you get this value?

Author: It was explain in the previous article. But maybe I can put a small reminder. This tutorial is not meant to be 100% beginner like the previous one

                    + (x & 0b00000001).count_ones() as u8 * 0b00001111,
            ]
        });
        // we count the number of bytes that have been copied so we don't send the whole buffer
        let mut i = 1;
        while let Some(chunk) = chunks.next() {
            // copy_from_slice requires that the source slice and the destination slice are
            // exactly the same otherwise it will panic
            data[i..(i + 4)].copy_from_slice(&chunk);
            i += 4;
        }

        if let Err(err) = i2c.write(address, &data[..i]) {
            sprintln!("Error: {:?}", err);
        }
        let _ = blue.toggle();
    };

    loop {
        draw_frame(FRAME_1);
        draw_frame(FRAME_2);
        draw_frame(FRAME_3);
        draw_frame(FRAME_4);
        draw_frame(FRAME_5);
        draw_frame(FRAME_6);
        draw_frame(FRAME_7);
        draw_frame(FRAME_8);
        draw_frame(FRAME_9);
        draw_frame(FRAME_10);
        draw_frame(FRAME_11);
        draw_frame(FRAME_12);
        draw_frame(FRAME_13);
        draw_frame(FRAME_14);
        draw_frame(FRAME_15);
    }
}
```

Implementation notes
--------------------

> I didn't use a macro this time but a closure instead. The difference between

Reviewer: my comment from last time wasn't entirely without merit :-D

Does the closure version also result in a smaller binary size?

Author: Normally yes that is the whole point. But it's not because the binary is smaller that it is faster at all!

The reason why it was faster in this particular case is because the instruction cache is particularly small so there are a lot of cache miss which forces the MCU to fetch the next instructions from the flash.

On a PC the whole program is loaded in memory so if you can avoid a few jumps here and there in the code it might save some time.

the two is that macros actually add code at the place where you invoke them.
Thus adding a lot of duplicated code. You can see the generated code of a macro
by using
[cargo-expand](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-expand). This is a very handy
tool if you work with macros.

My idea was that if I don't do a function call, it might be slightly faster.
But it turns out that it was quite the opposite here because the FE310-G002 CPU
has an instruction cache which can overflow if you have too many instructions
in your loop, thus forcing the CPU to load the instructions from flash memory

> instead (which is slow). In this case it was a lot slower if `draw_frame` was a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead (which is slow). In this case the macro version of `draw_frame` was a
```

> instead (which is slow). In this case the macro version of `draw_frame` was a
> macro.

Author: ```suggestion
instead (which is slow). In this case the macro version of `draw_frame` was a
a lot slower.
```
